
# The Aseprite extension

The recommended way to work with animations in RAManimator is through an [Aseprite](https://www.aseprite.org/) extension because Aseprite is designed for pixel art animations and has great scripting support, enabling almost seamless interaction with the emulator. If you do not want to use it, a much less convenient alternative is available through the command line and gif files. However, using the Aseprite interface is strongly recommended.

## Installation

The extension is distributed as `RAManimator.aseprite-extension`. You can either zip the contents of the `aseextension` directory yourself or get it from the release zip. Follow the [official instructions](https://aseprite.org/docs/extensions/) on how to install it. After that, you should find a `RAManimator` entry in your `File` menu.

## Palettes

The Gameboy and GBA do not explicitly store transparency of colors in their palettes. Often, the first color will be considered transparent, e.g. in GBA Pokémon sprites. Gameboy Pokémon sprites don't have transparency, using the same color for white highlights and the background. To simplify the process, RAManimator always considers the first color in the palette fully transparent and all others as opaque.

For Gameboy games, that means you have one transparent colors for layer backgrounds, then four colors for the image (and potentially four more for the shiny variants).

For GBA games, that means you have one fully transparent color, followed by sixteen colors of the actual palette. The first of these will look opaque in Aseprite, but rendered as fully transparent on the emulator. After that, there might be another sixteen colors for the shiny variant.

When you import a preexisting animation, it is recommended to add the fully transparent first color if not already present and then fill up the palette to four / sixteen per palette as required by the platform.

If you are unsure how exactly you should set the palette up, just import the hook of the animation you are editing and copy that.

## Save animations

Unfortunately, the animations that Aseprite sends to the emulator do not get saved automatically. To make RAManimator load them automatically on startup, you need to [save](workflow.md#save-to-file) them manually once you are done.

## Command list

While the concrete how-tos explain how to use the individual commands, here is a quick summary.

### Send to emulator

Sends the currently active sprite to the emulator. If an animation of the same hook is currently active, the new animation is going to start playing, so can directly preview what it looks like. This only works if a hook is attached to the file; if there isn't, use `Attach hook` to do so.

### Import slot

Loads the contents of the slot into a new sprite file. Consequently, a hook of the provided name will be generated, too. This is the default way to create new hooks dynamically and the new file can directly get animated. It is also very useful for debugging, e.g. to compare the graphic on screen to the expected hook if it doesn't get recognized.

### Import hook

This should be called first when creating a new animation. It loads the hook from the emulator as a new sprite that can then be animated. The advantage is that it automatically loads all secondary (in Pokémon, shiny) palettes in the way RAManimator needs them.

### Attach hook

If you already have animations that weren't imported, use this to attach a hook. Please also check that the palette is set up correctly as explained [above](#palettes)

### Update hook (palette)

When a game edited graphics so they do not match the expected hook, this updates the hook to what is currently on screen. If only the palette was changed, the palette variant can be used.

### Register slot

Registers a new slot, for which hooks can then get generated by [importing from it](#import-slot). This is only necessary when setting up new games or debugging.

### Clear animations

Removes all animations from the current library on the emulator. This is useful before starting to load animations for a clean export.

### Settings

If the server uses a different port for some reason, set it here.
